\section{Context-Sensitive Consonants}

\subsection{\gr{c} (\ph{s} and \ph{k})}

When followed by \gr{ae}, \gr{i}, \gr{e}, or \gr{y}, \gr{c} has the sound \ph{s}
(at the beginning of a word: \eg{Caesar, citrus, central, cyanide}; in the
middle: \eg{receipt, publicize, policy}). The digraph \gr{ce} at the end of a
word has the sound \ph{s}: it effects magic \gr{e} (\eg{pace, ice, reduce}),
except in the combination \gr{nce}, where it affects broad \gr{a} (\eg{mince,
nonce, whence, dance}).

\begin{exceptions}{\gr{ce} as \ph{s} not causing magic \gr{e}}
\item lettuce
\end{exceptions}

In \gr{cia} or \gr{cea} when not at the beginning of a word, \gr{c} has the
sound \ph{S} (\gr{social, ocean}).

In all other contexts, \gr{c} has the sound \ph{k} (\eg{cat, cod, cut, create,
logic}).

\begin{exceptions}{\gr{c} as \ph{k} before \gr{ae}, \gr{i}, \gr{e}, or \gr{y}}
\item Celtic
\end{exceptions}

\gr{cc} sounds as \ph{ks} in the contexts where the second \gr{c} would stand
for \ph{s} according to the rules above (\eg{accident, success}) and for \ph{k}
alone elsewhere (\eg{account, occupy}). It marks the previous vowel as short.

\begin{exceptions}{\gr{cc} as \ph{s} before \gr{ae}, \gr{i}, \gr{e}, or \gr{y}}
\item flaccid
\end{exceptions}

\subsection{\gr{ng} (\ph{N} and \ph{Ng}) and \gr{nge} (\ph{ndZ})}

Where the combination \gr{ng} occurs at the end of a morpheme, it indicates
\ph{N} (\eg{singing, clingy}). Within a single morpheme, it denotes \ph{Ng}
(\eg{linger, monger}).\footnote{In Northern England and some other areas,
\ph{N} is merged with \ph{Ng} except at the end of words; i.e. \eg{singer} and
\eg{linger} rhyme.}

In the combination \gr{nge} at the end of a morpheme, it sounds as \ph{ndZ} and
effects magic \gr{e} on the vowel \gr{a} but no others (\eg{change, angel}; but
\eg{revenge, binge, plunge}). This sometimes applies in other environments
(\eg{angel, dungeon}).

\subsection{\gr{j} and \gr{dg} (\ph{dZ} and \ph{Z})}

Except at the end of words, \gr{j} has the sound \ph{dZ}. This is most common at
the start of morphemes (\eg{just}, \eg{jam}, \eg{juice}), though it does occur
in the middle of words, most often in Latin-derived terms and loanwords such as
foreign proper names (\eg{trajectory}, \eg{Fiji}).

At the end of morphemes and in the middle of words, especially where consonant
doubling is required to mark a preceding short vowel, \ph{dZ} is usually spelt
\gr{dg} (\gr{dge}). This digraph cancels the effect of any magic \gr{e}
following it.

\subsection{\gr{t} and \gr{ti} (\ph{t}, \ph{S}, \ph{tS})}

The letter \gr{t} usually stands for the sound \ph{t} and behaves like a normal
consonant. However, when followed by \gr{i} it can also have the sound \ph{S} in
the suffixes \gr{tion} (\ph{S@n}) and \gr{tiate} (\ph{Si.eIt}) and its inflexions.

\gr{t} is also silent in the combination \gr{tch}, which sounds as \ph{tS} with
a short preceding vowel.
